Update user documentation for Delta Lake (#343)
microsoft/hyperspace: docs/_docs/08-ug-types-of-data-sources.md

For example, index creation:
```scala
val deltaDf = spark.read.format("delta").option("versionAsOf", version.get).load(dataPath)
hyperspace.createIndex(deltaDf, IndexConfig("deltaIndex", Seq("clicks"), Seq("Query")))
```

### Mutable dataset
For Delta Lake, You can still utilize the existing feature set such as Hybrid Scan & incremental refresh in the same way.
Please note that these features are based on the difference of source files.
If there are a lot of changes in the source dataset from update/insert/delete executions,
these features won't be applied or performed in an inefficient way.

We would recommend you not to make a lot of changes or create a proper partition to reduce the difference.

For more information, please refer
[Mutable dataset](https://microsoft.github.io/hyperspace/docs/ug-mutable-dataset/) page.

### Time travel query
Hyperspace can support Delta Lake time travel queries using Hybrid Scan.
In order to support an older version compared to the delta version of the latest index, *appended* files after
the older version are considered as *deleted* files, *deleted* files after the older version are considered as *appended* files.

> In the next Hyperspace release (v0.5), we will optimize time travel query by selecting a proper version of the index.

Reviewer: it might not be good to give the version number for a future version. It might be better to just say "we are working on improving time travel query by selecting a proper version of the index." But your call.

Reviewer: or just create an issue for this and link it here. Whenever that issue gets closed, people would know if this feature is in or not.

---
title: "Types of data sources"
permalink: /docs/ug-types-of-data-sources/
excerpt: "Supported types of data sources"
last_modified_at: 2021-01-28
toc: false
classes: wide
---

> This guide helps you to utilize indexes on other types of data source layers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide helps you to utilize indexes on other types of data sources such as [Delta Lake](https://github.com/delta-io/delta).
```

## Pluggable source builders

> Since Hyperspace v0.4, Hyperspace supports the indexes built on other types of data sources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since Hyperspace v0.4, Hyperspace supports indexes built on other types of data sources.
```

nit

To avoid unnecessary library dependencies, we provide pluggable source builders
to support other types of sources.

There are no special APIs for other source types, 
so you can use the existing APIs with a DataFrame built on a different type of source seamlessly.

> Currently, Hyperspace supports the below source types:

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should add Iceberg here and link to the on-going PR? Something like:

Iceberg (work-in-progress PR)

- Delta Lake (since v0.4)

## Delta Lake
Since Hyperspace v0.4, Hyperspace supports index creation on Delta Lake tables.
You can add Delta Lake support by setting the following config before creating Hyperspace object.
```scala
spark.conf.set("spark.hyperspace.index.sources.fileBasedBuilders",
      "com.microsoft.hyperspace.index.sources.delta.DeltaLakeFileBasedSourceBuilder," +
      "com.microsoft.hyperspace.index.sources.default.DefaultFileBasedSourceBuilder")

val hyperspace = new Hyperspace(spark)
```

You can use the existing API with a Delta Lake Dataframe.

For example, index creation:
```scala
val deltaDf = spark.read.format("delta").option("versionAsOf", version.get).load(dataPath)
hyperspace.createIndex(deltaDf, IndexConfig("deltaIndex", Seq("clicks"), Seq("Query")))
```

### Mutable dataset

> For Delta Lake, You can still utilize the existing feature set such as Hybrid Scan & incremental refresh in the same way.

Reviewer 2: nit

```suggestion
For Delta Lake, you can still utilize the existing feature set such as Hybrid Scan & incremental refresh in the same way.
```

Please note that these features are based on the difference of source files.

> If there are a lot of changes in the source dataset from update/insert/delete executions,
> these features won't be applied or performed in an inefficient way.
> 
> We would recommend you not to make a lot of changes or create a proper partition to reduce the difference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there are a lot of changes in the source dataset from update/insert/delete executions,
these features won't be applied due to performance implications. We highly recommend 
that you analyze performance on your own workloads before going into production. 
```
```

For more information, please refer
[Mutable dataset](https://microsoft.github.io/hyperspace/docs/ug-mutable-dataset/) page.

### Time travel query
Hyperspace can support Delta Lake time travel queries using Hybrid Scan.
We can extract appended and deleted files from an older delta version based on the latest index.
Then we can apply Hybrid Scan by considering:
- **appended** files after the older version as **deleted** files 
- **deleted** files after the older version as **appended** files

We are working on improving time travel query by selecting a proper version of a candidate index.
If there are multiple refreshed versions of a candidate index, we could get the "closest" version for the given delta version and apply Hybrid Scan.

> In this way, we could reduce the difference of sources files which should be handled with Hybrid Scan.

Reviewer 2: If you want to have this, I suggest having an issue where you discuss this to some extent and just link to that from here as: `We have some planned improvements discussed in this issue.`
